welcome to topcast and to my latest
episode on my discussions of the fabric
of reality we're up to part two of
chapter 8 chapter 8 being the
significance of life and last time we
really spent time unpacking what this
thing life is as a knowledge bearing
entity we didn't quite get to the Crux
of the matter why is it significant in
the universe and that's what I'm going
to talk about today last time I did
mention some of the great luminaries in
biology in evolutionary biology and the
greatest living evolutionary biologists
of course Rich Dawkins until recently
when he unfortunately passed away
Stephen J Gould also occupied an
important place in the history of our
understanding of evolutionary biology
there were ways in which Dawkins and
Gould were at loggerheads about the
details of evolutionary science Gould in
particular wasn't a great fan of The
Selfish Gene idea he thought that for
example example we could have species
selection and group selection but the
unit of selection did not need to be the
gene as such Dawkins is on the other
side of that argument and says the only
thing that's being selected is the Gene
and this is the perspective I have been
explaining but during the week someone
contacted me about a completely
different issue this was about how do we
go about trying to understand what
colors for example dinosaurs were
imagine we don't have the evidence yet
and you're making a movie and you want
to predict what the color of the
particular dinosaur is if you don't have
the evidence what can you do how can you
use evolutionary science to perhaps try
to guess what adaptation the dinosaur
would have had and this got me thinking
of something that Gould wrote that I
think that he was on the side of Dawkins
with although when you read accounts of
the debate on this particular paper I'm
about to mention there there is some
suggestion that one of the motivations
that Stephen J Gould wrote this paper
with a collaborator was in order to
attack some of Dawkins ideas but I think
this is just one of those interesting
sociological aspects of science I think
we can look at this paper independently
of the sometimes a more personal
differences that Gould and Dawkins might
have had now when you read the paper by
Gould that I'm about to talk about
Dawkins doesn't actually get mentioned
but apparently and again I'm no expert
as such on evolutionary biology
apparently the theme running through
this thing is a bit of a dig at Dawkins
or at least this idea of The Selfish
Gene that said I don't really get that
sense the paper is called and it's been
cited tens of thousands of times it's
called the spandrels of San Marco and
the panglossian Paradigm a critique of
the adaptionist program it's by Stephen
J Gould and his collaborator is Richard
C lewinton and Richard lewinton went on
to say that really he didn't contribute
much to the paper we'll just take him at
his word Stephen J Gould passed away a
few years ago so perhaps Richard
lewinton was just being nice who knows
doesn't really matter this is one of
those papers that I really valued
getting the opportunity to spend some
time really investigating when I was at
University as I say I did a subject
called philosophy of biology and the
lecturer was a great fan of Stephen J
Gould not so much a fan of Richard
Dawkins but this is one of the papers
that we spent a lot of time unpacking
and so I remember it reasonably well but
I went back and I read it again because
it comes to bear on this question of
what color were the dinosaurs if we
don't have any evidence or we don't
understand we don't have a sufficient
amount of DNA to reform a particular
dinosaur we're guessing when we're
drawing pictures of dinosaurs when we're
making movies of dinosaurs we're largely
guessing as to precisely what they
looked like they've got bones that have
turned into rocks called fossils that's
what we've got to go by so how can we
figure out what color they are I think
there's actually some quite clever
techniques today where some of the
dinosaurs at least we can have some idea
of what they might have looked like I
don't know what those techniques are
exactly but you can look that up in any
case this paper is about something
called the spandrels of San Marco okay
so what's a spandrel well first let's
start there so if you've got an arched
doorway just imagine an arch doorway
then if it's in a wall somewhere The
Archers themselves form
semi-triangular spaces between where the
arch itself is and where the top of the
roof let's say is there's a little
triangular space just there now in that
triangle your space you're limited as to
what can go there but it's a necessary
part of making an archway you're making
Archway the reason why this doorway is
there at all is for a particular purpose
so people can get through the door
people can get through this particular
space that's why it's there that's what
the function is for and an arch is a
particularly strong structure so human
beings design arches and the arch forms
this strong structure that allows people
to walk beneath it okay it's also part
of the way in which the ceiling is held
up let's say but the spandrel is this
space between the arch and the ceiling
okay right what's that got to do with
Evolution okay we're getting there what
is San Marco San Marco is a basilica a
huge Church in Italy and there are lots
of archways there let's just go to what
Gould has to say about these spandrels
of San Marco and maybe there you'll see
where I'm going with all this San Marco
or Saint Mark's as ghoul will be using
the term reading from Gould quote the
Great Central dime of Saint Mark's
Cathedral in Venice presents in its
Mosaic design a detailed iconography
expressing the Mainstays of the
Christian faith three Circles of figures
radiate out from a central image of
Christ Angels disciples and virtues each
circle is divided into quadrants even
though the Dome itself is radially
symmetrical in structure each quadrant
meets one of the four spandrels in The
Archers below the Dome spandrels the
tapering triangular spaces formed by the
intersection of two rounded arches at
right angles are necessary architectural
byproducts of mounting a dome on rounded
arches each spandrel contains a design
admirably fitted into its tapering space
an evangelist sits in the upper part
flanked by the Heavenly cities below a
man representing one of the four
biblical Rivers Tigris Euphrates Indus
and Nile pours water from a pitcher in
the narrowing space below his feet end
quote okay so there here we have Gould
describing what these spandrels are they
are ornate in the space between the arch
and the ceiling if you like there has
been an ornate picture placed okay so
what he's about to come to is imagine
you're coming across this for the first
time you need to explain this design
well just as with living organisms
there's a problem there of explaining
the design the apparent design we know
there's no design we know there's no
designer but there's the appearance of
design that calls out for an explanation
the explanation is Darwin's theory of
evolution by natural selection which
Gould is a great proponent of okay the
same as Dawkins he's not going to deny
that evolution is a real thing there's
just a a difference on what the unit of
selection is but here we're talking
about where do we begin in trying to
understand what the design of this thing
is so if you're looking at this Archway
and your eye is immediately drawn to the
span drill to the iconography the the
detail held artistic work in the corner
there well that's the wrong place to
start that's not why the archway exists
at all it's certainly intricate and it
looks for all the world highly designed
and so on and so forth but the real
thing you should be looking at is the
archway now this is where we get into
part of the distinction between Gould
and Dawkins Gould wants to talk about
the entire organism okay he wants to
start there rather than the little
details but this spandrel idea I think
is separate to the selfish Gene versus
group or species selection idea I just
want to read a little bit more of Gould
and we'll come back to what the punch
line here is for me and what I'm talking
about Gould is saying on the spandrels
quote Oh by the way by the way before
before I get to the quote again um it's
worth looking up the spandrels of Saint
Marco if you just want a picture okay I
can put one up here on the screen but of
course for any listeners you might need
to just quickly Google what a spandrel
is to begin with and then the spandrels
of samaka have a look at the ornate
pictures there Gould goes on to say
quote the design is so elaborate
harmonious and purposeful that we
attempted to view it as the starting
point of any analysis as the cause in
some sense of the surrounding
architecture but this would invert the
proper path of analysis the system
begins with an architectural constraint
the necessary four spandrels and their
tapering triangular form they provide a
space in which the mosaics worked they
set the quadripartate symmetry of the
Dome above such architectural
constraints are bound and we find them
easy to understand because we do not
impose our biological biases on them
every fan vaulted ceiling must have a
series of Open Spaces along the midline
of the Vault where the sides of the fans
intersect between the pillars since the
spaces must exist they are often used
for ingenious ornamental effect in
King's College Chapel in Cambridge for
example the spaces contain bosses
alternately embellished with the Tudor
Rose and porticolis in a sense this
design represents an adaptation but the
architectural constraint is clearly the
primary these spaces arise as a
necessary byproduct of fan vaulting
their appropriate use as a secondary
effect anyone who tried to argue the
structure exists because the alternation
of rows and particles makes so much
sense in a Tudor Cathedral would be
inviting the same ridicule that Voltaire
heaps on Dr panglos things cannot be
other than they are everything is made
for the best purpose our noses were made
to carry spectacles so we have
spectacles legs were clearly invented
for breaches so we wear them yet
evolutionary biologists in the tendency
to focus exclusively on immediate
adaptation to local conditions do tend
to ignore architectural constraints and
perform just such an inversion of
explanation end quote what I'm going to
say about all of this is that not
everything that is in an organism is
adapted for sometimes I hear certain
popularizes that say oh okay so he's not
a popularizer but he's someone who's at
least somewhat informed about science
somewhat informed about biology claims
to have studied biology for a little
while and then went on to philosophy the
comedian Ricky Gervais okay so there's
all sorts of wrong with what Ricky
Gervais thinks about how science works
but one thing he says when trying to
explain evolution to people is the thing
exists because it works so the reason
why bacteria are around are because they
work they got something right the reason
why the insects and the grubs and all
the other things that that aren't
particularly intelligent are still
around is because they work
evolutionarily speaking but what I would
say about that is not everything needs
to work by which I mean serves a
functional purpose serves a functional
purpose or at least you can
misunderstand what the feature happens
to be and what the functional purpose
might be here's another example so
you're looking at blood you're looking
at blood coursing through the veins now
you might ask the question what is the
evolutionary adaptation of having red
blood why is it red okay why has it
adapted itself to being read why not
blue or something else it's kind of the
wrong question it's not that it's
adapted to be read is that hemoglobin
carries oxygen and oxygen carrying
hemoglobin looks red it didn't adapt to
be red that the hemoglobin adapted to
carry oxygen why is it carrying oxide
well it keeps the organism alive but the
red is a byproduct a byproduct and so
this is the point that Gould's making is
that in organisms we have sometimes a
byproduct a thing that doesn't really
call out for explanation Beyond it's
just well that's just what the color of
hemoglobin carrying oxygen is it just
happens to be red or you could you know
talk about any number of diseases of age
that people get over time it's like why
did we adapt ourselves together why do
we adapt ourselves to get bad knees and
bad backs as we get older what is the
adaptation for why should a human evolve
in such a way that they that it's
advantageous for them to have bad backs
later in life well it's a wrong question
we didn't not every characteristic that
a person has has been adapted for it's
not like we have evolved for that
particular thing it's not like that
thing needs to be beneficial Dawkins
does agree with this in a sense Dawkins
I I've heard him talk about
um the the Just So Stories when we don't
have a good explanation okay so he
doesn't use the word term good
explanation but I think people have
asked him over time questions like and
this has appeared in some of his books
more than one of his books I think the
question of why should homosexuality
exist why should there be an Adaptive
pressure for homosexuality in any given
species and he says look people can give
just those stories by which he means you
could you could make up a story you can
say things like oh well you know when we
lived in tribes the homosexual people
didn't compete for mates but they did
still look after the children now that's
that's an account of why it could be
reasonable to say that homosexuality
continues to arise in humans but then
why does it arise in other species as
well okay so do we have to find an
advantageous reason for the existence of
this thing now there's a whole bunch of
reasons why genes get copied over and
over again and continue to get copied
while the knowledge the useful
information gets copied but that's not
to say that all information that exists
on the genome must be useful it could be
the equivalent of a spandrel okay this
isn't denying that there is knowledge
content in the genome absolutely there
is okay and that's the knowledge stuff
that's the knowledge stuff and that gets
copied that tends to get copied but does
that but does the existence of
information that is useful that gets
copied deny the fact that there could be
useless information that gets copied
could that happen
or just information that's not that
functional or information that's not
competing with other kinds of useful
information could that get copied yes it
can now we're going to talk today in the
fabric of reality about junk DNA I'm not
talking about that junk DNA is part of
the DNA that's not part of the genome
it's the stuff that can just mutate and
then it gets copied it gets copied
regardless okay so it's it's useless
kind of stuff this is different again
this is part of the genome that could
get copied the equivalent of a spaniel
the equivalent of well is there
information there in the DNA that
specifies the redness of hemoglobin no
no the redness is a byproduct now
there's certainly information in the DNA
there that specifies that hemoglobin has
to be manufactured okay you need to have
hemoglobin this protein hemoglobin needs
to be produced by the body so that the
oxygen can be transported through the
bloodstream and it happens that when the
hemoglobin combines with oxygen it
produces this red color but that's not
specified in the DNA as such there's no
Gene for redness is what I'm saying and
what someone like Gould would be saying
in the DNA it can be a byproduct there
can be things like this so the when we
go back to the question from my listener
who was asking how can we use this to
predict how can we use evolution by
natural selection to predict what colors
dinosaurs would be my answer was we
don't know we don't if we don't know yet
if we don't have the DNA if we don't
have other information we're just
guessing it might well be the case that
the color of dinosaurs comes down to
this spandrelike effect if you're an
alien you've got nothing but access to
the DNA of people and you can see by
reading it with your fancy alien
technology you can you can see that it
codes for the production of this protein
called hemoglobin that would not tell
you what color hemoglobin when it's got
oxygen combined with it is going to turn
red there's nothing in the DNA that can
tell you that information it could be
like this it could be kind of like this
when it comes to predicting the color of
dinosaurs as well that it might be a
spandrel type thing a side effect and
trying to understand at The evolutionary
level why a dinosaur is the color that
it is because it might be like
understanding trying to understand why
certain birds are the color they are
maybe it has an evolutionary Advantage
for some birds to be particular colors
or maybe not maybe they just have some
of them just have random colors and it's
not evolutionarily adapted for at all
it's not all that useful to be a white
swan in some places as compared as
compared to a Black Swan in other places
maybe in the past it was but now it's no
longer that in Australia not only we
have black swans we have black cockatoos
as well these black cockatoos we can
give a story about why there should be
black cockatoos and black swans for that
matter maybe there was a huge Wildfire a
Bushfire that turned everything black
for a while there and so in order to
avoid Predators this adaptation arose
this mutation was caused by the random
events that Evolution that the cause
evolutionary mutations okay cosmic ray
whatever you want so the cockatoos
turned black the swans turned black from
being white and then they were
camouflaged against the black ash of the
land after it was burned by a wildfire a
Bushfire okay so there's a plausible
story but then explain how once the bush
fires over why they haven't gone back to
whatever color they were why are they
black still after millions of years
perhaps I don't know and why only those
birds being black when we still have
white birds and multi-colored birds in
Australia as well why why aren't all
birds the same color even though they
live in the same area at times wildly
diverse I don't know that there's a good
explanation of these things that could
be that those things are spandrels too
random mutations that arrive that just
get copied now making maybe in some
cases yes you can give good evolutionary
stories about well it's mating behavior
yes okay but in all case cases for every
single bird are you going to be able to
provide exactly the same explanation I
doubt this I doubt that the field of
ornithology and specifically
evolutionary Ornithology could really
account for all this stuff it could be
that some things are byproducts and for
the same reason that hemoglobin has the
color that it does and that could also
be why homosexuality continues to arise
it could just be a byproduct it could it
could be that the genes are coding for
something else if indeed it is genetic
by the way and you know I'm not coming
down hard and fast on one of those
particular ideas I don't think that
matter is necessarily settled I also
don't think it's particularly important
but whatever the case Evolution cannot
be used always to make a good prediction
about the features of an organism some
of them will be genuine adaptations but
some won't be some will just be annoying
byproducts
byproducts of of other things that
really were adapted first specific
reasons in the case of the bad back and
the bad knee well that can just be
because evolutionarily we've adapted
ourselves to walking upright adapting
ourselves I'm talking as if we've got
this Arrow of evolution we don't the
mutations have been selected for us
standing upright for us being tall for
us being bipedal and having this Vision
that looks forward and in standing up
straight and being on our feet for long
periods of time and being able to run
reasonably fast and all this sort of
stuff that also has the offshoot
byproduct unfortunate effect in this
particular case of causing bad backs in
people as they age and causing bad knees
in people as they Age and and feet
problems and all the health problems
that people tend to get by virtue of the
fact that we stand up that we're
vertical this is unusual amongst animals
isn't it bipedal Apes most of them go
running around the ground that's what
evolution worked that out for a long
time we're relatively recent and so we
still have all these bodily problems
that we have to go to doctors for and
fix and some doctors of course and
scientists say well you can take your
tonsils out without much trouble and you
can take your appendix out without much
trouble there are disagreements on this
of course some say you absolutely need
both of these in order for your immune
system to function properly others say
no these are just artifacts
evolutionarily speaking that can be
removed without too much trouble in
people you can take out the appendix you
can take out the tonsils in which case
again spandrel okay it's a leftover
byproduct there's no reason why we were
these organs were adapted for a
particular purpose this is where Dawkins
and Gould can come together we can just
say look it's the genes that's being
that are being selected for they need
not have a particular function the gene
is just doing what it can to be
replicated whether or not it helps out
the organism or not so Dawkins is of
course absolutely on side with this so
if you remember David talks about this
in the beginning of an Infinity this
idea that you could have genes which
were optimal for the breeding of a
particular species of bird but that
wouldn't be optimal for the gene if the
gene mutated such that that particularly
individuals within the species nested a
bit earlier then they would have an
advantage the genes would have an
advantage but it would be bad overall
for the species because there's an
optimal nesting time for the species
like it could be as he says in the book
the beginning of April now if a
particular individual started nesting
earlier well that's no good for the
whole species because maybe the food is
not as plentiful and so on and so forth
but if this particular individual begins
nesting earlier good for them because
they have access to food and they they
get a they're ahead of the game even
though overall for the whole species if
the entire species started doing that it
would be terrible for the species so is
is that Gene which appears to be
successful appears to be successful for
the species better well it is because it
itself is going to get copied it itself
is going to be passed on at a rate you
know bird for bird so to speak higher
than the individuals that are nesting
later even though that's good for the
entire fire species good for as in the
entire species is going to survive
longer even though the genes particular
genes won't survive as long okay go back
to the beginning of infinity to
understand more about that can we use
Evolution to predict what the color of
dinosaurs would be given we know the
colors of some dinosaurs let's say if we
have one that we don't know the color I
I just say well firstly I don't know but
these are the things we need to consider
that we cannot predict the growth of
knowledge we cannot predict the
direction in which Evolution goes
Evolution results from random mutations
and the selection of those random
mutations has something to do with the
environment but then again there are
cases where a thing can just continue to
get copied and copied and copied because
that's useful for the gene even if not
for the organism even if it's not
beneficial for the organism it could be
useless for the organism okay like the
spandrels of San Marco they're kind of
useless for this keeping the structure
itself up to keeping the ceiling of the
cathedral the Basilica in the air the
spandrels don't the the decorative
spandrels don't do anything for that
it's the archways that are the support
structures they're the real thing that
is that is keeping everything up asking
the question of how is the red color of
blood helping the organism to survive or
what's the benefit of the red color it's
the wrong question the red color is a
byproduct what's really going on is
we've got oxygen being transported
around okay and that that enables
respiration and it just so happens that
it's a red color but it's not the red
that's been selected for it's the oxygen
carrying capacity that has been selected
for if anything has okay but these
debates in evolutionary biology very
interesting very informative uh well
worth going into if you're interested in
this particular area of Science and
philosophy but for now I think we should
begin after that long introduction going
back to the significance of Life chapter
8 of the fabric of reality and let me
pick it up where David get to in the
fabric of reality the real kicker of
what is to come in the beginning of
infinity you're right in the fabric of
reality about halfway through chapter
eight we're at now quote the point is
that although all known life is based on
replicators what the phenomenon of life
is really about is knowledge
we can give a definition of adaptation
directly in terms of knowledge an entity
is adapted to its Niche if it embodies
knowledge that causes the niche to keep
that knowledge in existence now we are
getting closer to the reason why life is
fundamental life is about the physical
embodiment of knowledge and in chapter
six we came across a law of physics the
Turing principle which is also about the
physical embodiment of knowledge it says
that it is possible to embody the laws
of physics as they apply to every
physically possible environment in
programs for a virtual reality generator
genes are such programs not only that
but all other virtual reality programs
that physically exist or will ever exist
are direct or indirect effects of life
for example the virtual reality programs
that run on our computers and in our
brains are indirect effects of human
life so life is the means presumably a
necessary means by which the effects
referred to in the Turing principle have
been implemented in nature this is
encouraging but it is not quite
sufficient to establish that life is a
fundamental phenomenon for I have not
yet established that the Turing
principle itself has the status of a
fundamental law a skeptic might argue
that it does not it is a law about the
physical embodiment of knowledge and the
skeptic might take the view that
knowledge is a parochial anthropocentric
concept rather than a fundamental one
that is it is one of those things which
is significant to us because of what we
are animals whose ecological niche
depends on creating applying knowledge
but not significant in an absolute sense
to a koala bear whose ecological niche
depends on eucalyptus leaves eucalyptus
is significant to the knowledge wielding
ape Homo sapiens knowledge is
significant end quote now listen is the
top casts readers that begin Infinity
they know what's coming I'm stealing
David's Thunder here but I've been
stealing David's Thunder for the entire
series of top cast I suppose before he
gets to the main point we know what's
coming we know that anyone who claims
that knowledge is not significant is
trying to prophesy the growth of
knowledge to say life is not significant
fundamentally to the universe to the
evolution of the universe it's trying to
predict what life will do an inherently
impossible thing in for two reasons one
we can't predict the way in which
Evolution will go on to change the
universe and we can't predict what
people will do or in other words we
can't predict the growth of knowledge
either evolutionary knowledge or
explanatory knowledge and so it doesn't
matter what the process is throughout
the Universe what people will do about
that thing at some point in the future
cannot be known to us now and so this is
the thunder this is the thunder I'm
stealing from David he's going to use
particular examples it's really
interesting it's interesting for me it's
interesting for someone who's a fan of
the work of David Deutsch to see how
even paying what I thought was close
attention to the book years ago I still
come across stuff like this and it's
breathtaking in the fact that people
today reading the beginning of infinity
are taken aback by the way in which the
ideas are so groundbreaking and yet as I
keep on saying here it is here it is in
the fabric of reality back in 1997.
these ideas being brought together these
ideas about the fundamental nature of
knowledge and of life in this particular
instance okay so let's go back to the
book when talking about this skeptic who
says that knowledge is just this
anthropocentric parochial kind of thing
David says quote but the skeptic would
be wrong knowledge is significant not
only to Homo sapiens nor only on the
planet Earth I have said that whether
something does or does not have a large
physical impact is not decisive as to
whether it is fundamental in nature but
it is relevant let us consider the
astrophysical effects of knowledge the
theory of Stellar Evolution the
structure and development of stars is
one of the success stories of science
note The Clash of terminology here the
word evolution in physics means
development or simply motion not
variation and selection only essential
ago even the source of the sun's energy
was unknown the best physics of the day
provided only the false conclusion that
whatever its energy source was the sun
could not have been shining for more
than 100 million years end quote just by
the way the reason why this was thought
was this was prior to Nuclear Physics
they thought well the Sun's shining
that's a big ball of fire there
therefore combustion and so they knew
how to measure the mass of the Sun that
that's easy that's Kepler's laws that's
the rate at which the Earth moves around
the Sun taking 365 days per year to go
around given the distance from the Sun
150 million kilometers then the sun must
have a particular Mass I won't go
further through the physics of this but
look it up if you like we know what the
mass of the Sun is very very accurately
we can tell what the mass of the Sun is
so therefore if the only known source of
light and heat that you have access to
is chemical combustion you can calculate
how old the thing must possibly be the
maximum age of the sun then you come up
with a number
problem is as an astrophysicist coming
up with this highly precise number using
the best known physics of the day it's
completely at odds with what the
evolutionary biologists and the
geologists are telling you the
evolutionary biologists are saying oh no
life has been around for billions of
years and the geologists are saying ah
the planet Earth it's got to be at least
four and a half billion years old and
you're there going oh but hold on my
precise mathematical astrophysical
calculations are telling me that the sun
could only be 100 million years old
what's going on
just backing up as David says quote
the best physics of the day provided
only the false conclusion that whatever
its energy source was the sun could not
have been shining for more than 100
million years interestingly the
geologists and paleontologists already
knew from fossil evidence of what life
had been doing that the sun must have
been shining on the earth for a billion
years at least then Nuclear Physics was
discovered and it was applied in great
detail to the physics of the Interiors
of stars since then the theory of
Stellar revolution has matured We Now
understand what makes a star shine
pausing there just my reflection on this
so that they had a problem they had a
problem a clash of ideas
the idea about how long the sun could
have been shining and what evolutionary
biology paleontologists and the
geologists were telling us about the
fossil record and the age of that so
these two things conflicted this is
what's going on today with things like
dark matter and dark energy we've got a
conflict we've got a conflict between
our observations and our theories our
theory of what the observation is I
should say we think that we're seeing an
accelerating expansion of the universe
we think that we're seeing a rapidly
rotating Galaxy we're invoking the idea
of dark matter or perhaps a different
theory of gravity in the case of dark
matter or an accelerating expansion the
universe there must be a resolution to
this theories are wrong observations are
wrong it's a problem we don't say anyone
who comes along right now and is
absolutely thumping the table
and saying this is the answer this
solves the problems but that's a problem
that's a problem at the moment because
there is no neat explanation that solves
that particular problem and it is
consistent with everything else and
makes sense in light of all the other
things can do what the present theories
can do and more we don't have that yet
okay so let's keep going David says
quote We Now understand what makes a
star Shine for most types of style we
can predict what temperature color
luminosity and diameter it has at each
stage of its history how long each stage
lasts what elements the star creates by
nuclear transmutation and so on this
theory has been tested and borne out by
observations of the Sun and other stars
we can use the theory to predict the
future development of the sun it says
that the sun will continue to shine with
great stability for another five billion
years or so it will then expand to about
100 times its present diameter to become
a red giant star then it will pulsate
flare into a Nova collapse and cool
eventually becoming a black dwarf but
will all this this really happened to
the sun has every Star that formed a few
billion years before the sun and with
the same mass and composition already
become a red giant as the theory
predicts or is it possible that some
apparently insignificant chemical
processes on minor planets orbiting
those Stars might alter the course of
nuclear and gravitational processes
having overwhelmingly more mass and
energy end quote so that's the big
question that's what we're going to go
on with about how could life and people
change the evolution of stuff
but just before we get there just by the
way David has said there you know these
theories these great theories of nuclear
physics astrophysics Stellar
nucleosynthesis okay the way in which
elements are formed in the core of stars
they allow us to make predictions yes
they also and I've been at pains to try
and explain this to people that even
when it comes to physics the true role
is David of course has said has been the
world's greatest proponent on this an
explanation isn't just about the
predictions an explanation invokes the
existence of things it's telling you
what is really out there in reality and
how what the causal links between things
happen to be the particularly things
that are happening out there not just
predicting the future but we know what
exists out there in the universe even if
we can't see it the theories of nuclear
physics as applied to stars and what
stars are doing not only allow us to
predict how Stars behave over time what
the Sun is going to do absent people of
course but also tell us that for example
there should be lots and lots of things
like black holes and pulsars and brown
dwarves these cool dim remnants left
over from stars that we do not observe
that in fact at present technology is
hopeless mostly incapable of ever
observing existing in other galaxies
this is one of the motivations by the
way for the Macho theory of dark matter
what's the Macho theory of Dark Matter
massive compact Halo objects these small
Stars dead remnants of stars the brown
dwarves so to speak that have cooled
down and we just can't see them now
these have been ruled out by the way
with various observations these Stars
likely cannot explain dark matter
because among other things it's not
merely the rotation of galaxies of
spiral galaxies that that tells us that
there's some problem here there's
there's this dark matter there in the
galaxy or that our theory of gravity is
wrong one or the other or a third thing
that we don't know but this theory of
astrophysics does tell us that the
number of stars that are out there that
we cannot see is vast is vast because we
know that
All Stars end their lives in some lives
I say lives and their main sequence
existence the burning of hydrogen in an
interesting way which results in them
being almost invisible almost invisible
black holes and is is one possibility
neutron stars okay so neutron stars can
generally be seen by radio telescopes
but not always there could be some
ancient ones that have slowed down their
rate of rotation that we don't see or
that are weak or not point the beams
aren't pointed in our direction there's
all sorts of reasons why we might not
see the vast number of neutron stars
that happen to be out there and then
dark brown dwarves the the white dwarf
that is that has cooled down rapidly
especially as the constituents of the
so-called population three stars the
very first stars that existed in the
universe perhaps they had properties
slightly different to the star today
because among other things they were
made almost purely of hydrogen helium
now what does it's unlike the sun the
sun has impurities because it is a
second generation of stars these very
first generation of stars did not have
the impurities some theories tend to
suggest that these these impurities
really do act as a catalyst and causing
a differential burning through of the of
the nuclear fuel these population Stars
Burn things differently who knows what
affects these things could have in real
life we can do simulations we can do
simulations of these first population
Styles but the simulations are based
upon the best present known physics and
again as I say who knows what really
went on one day we might be able to test
these things because of course you have
look back time you can look back in
theory to see these Stars we just don't
have the technology yet I don't think
we've seen a proper population three
star yet okay so David's just asked us
to consider whether or not there could
be some apparently insignificant
chemical processes on minor planets
orbiting stars that could alter alter
the course of evolution of things like
stars he goes on to say quote if the sun
does become a red giant it will engulf
and destroy the Earth if any of our
descendants physical or intellectual are
still on the earth at that time they
might not want that to happen they might
do everything in their power to prevent
it is it obvious that they will not be
able to certainly our present technology
is far too puny to do the job but
neither our theory of evolution or any
other physics we know gives any reason
to believe that the task is impossible
on the contrary we already know in Broad
terms what it would involve namely
removing matter from the Sun and we have
several billion years to perfect our
half-baked plans and put them into
practice if in the event our descendants
do succeed in Saving themselves in this
way then our present theory of still a
revolution when applied to one
particular star the sun gives entirely
the wrong answer and the reason why it
gives the wrong answer is that it does
not take into account the effect of Life
on Stellar Evolution it takes into
account such fundamental physical
effects as nuclear and electromagnetic
forces gravity hydrostatic pressure and
radiation pressure but not live it seems
likely that the knowledge required to
control the sun in this way could not
evolve by natural selection alone so it
must specifically be intelligent life on
Whose presence the future of the sun
depends now it may be objected that it
is a huge announced supported assumption
that intelligence will survive on Earth
for several billion years and even if it
does it is a further assumption that it
will then possess the knowledge required
to control the sun one current view is
that intelligent life on Earth is even
now a danger of destroying itself if not
by nuclear war then by some catastrophic
side effect of technological advance or
scientific research many people think
that if intelligent life is to survive
the Earth it will do so only by
suppressing technological progress end
quote well haven't things gotten even
worse in many respects when it comes to
this pessimistic notion the list of
things David could write now okay not
merely nuclear war catastrophic climate
change the AI apocalypse terrible
viruses name your catastrophe as I have
said before and David has mentioned
there right at the end there let me just
read it again he says and this is so
true today quote many people think that
if intelligent life is to survive on
Earth it will do so only by suppressing
technological progress end quote and
this is what I call the master problem
the the slowing down of progress this is
the one thing that absolutely guarantees
absolutely guarantees the non-survival
of our species because if we slow down
progress it means we won't find the
problem in time it means we'll lack the
wealth and the power in order to be able
to do anything about it we need more
rapid progress this is the most
important thing this is the most
important problem how can we make
progress more rapidly we do not know
what the next problem we're going to
encounter is going to be and how bad it
will be but if we want to be in the best
possible position to do something about
it we need to be as wealthy and powerful
and knowledgeable as possible anything
less is putting us at more risk
absolutely putting us at more risk
anyone who argues for slowing down
progress you need to take that argument
personally what they're saying is they
want to slow down the rate of problem
solving they want to slow down the rate
at which knowledge is created they want
to introduce more risks at a more rapid
rate into the system error is everywhere
but error correction happens at a
particular rate error correction happens
at the rate that we know how to identify
and correct the errors that requires
progress it requires knowledge requires
fundamental Research into specifically
areas like physics mathematics all areas
of science knowledge creation broadly
technology broadly we need rapid
progress everywhere as fast as possible
people who argue for the slowing of
progress no matter where it happens to
be are arguing against a particular kind
of error correction there and this
includes by the way if I'm going to hop
onto a somewhat political hobby horse in
ensuring that the third what the people
of the third world have access to cheap
energy to fuel their technology
production their knowledge creation they
deserve to have access to all the
technology we have absolutely they do
they deserve to have access to cheap
information via the Internet the only
way to do this feasibly right now is to
give them energy as cheaply as rapidly
as possible asking to rely on unreliable
solar and wind for example here we go
have a little bit of solar I have a
little bit of wind for one Village out
of a million people is not doing
anything this tokenistic way in which
charitable Foundations at times go about
doing things rather than allowing the
market to go in there rather than
allowing people to purchase the energy
at the cheapest possible rate to fuel
their knowledge economy is completely
immoral not only because it hurts them
it hurts the entire world it puts us at
more risk this needs to be taken
personally as I say we need rapid
knowledge production we need scientists
to have access to funds that are
otherwise being taken away from them by
governments because of Taxation and so
on and so forth people would contribute
vast sums of wealth to fundamental
science if they weren't being taxed so
highly because people understand better
than the politicians in government where
the funding should go governments don't
know government committees don't know
they are captured by the political
zeitgeists so much of the funding goes
into the same areas all the time if we
want to make rapid progress if we want
to avoid the problems that some of which
David mentions there even just like the
sun expanding in some billions of years
then we cannot we cannot suppress
technological progress as he has
observed there suppress any kind of
knowledge creation it is that important
epistemological moral Maxim out of the
beginning of infinity we should not
destroy the means of error correction we
should not slow down the means of error
correction because this is to reduce our
capacity to create the knowledge in time
and to have the technology which can
help us withstand the problems we have
not yet encountered now they're the
important ones yes of course we need to
address the problems now but not at the
expense of being able to rapidly
identify the problems of tomorrow and
that will take knowledge it will take us
being able to be agile in the capacity
to identify those problems and correct
the errors okay off that hobby horse
back to the significance of life but it
does come to bear on that that is the
significance of life is that in in in in
terms of us we are the thing that is
creating the explanatory knowledge and
correcting the errors and the only
entity that exists that cares about the
rest of it that cares about all the
other life on Earth so let me just back
up a little bit David has just said so
they the pessimists quote might fear
that our developing the technology are
required to regulate stars is
incompatible with surviving for long
enough to use that technology and
therefore that life on Earth is destined
One Way or Another Not to affect the
evolution of the sun I am sure that this
pessimism is misguided and as I shall
explain in chapter 14 there is every
reason to conjecture that our
descendants will eventually control the
Sun and much more admittedly we can
foresee neither their technology nor
their wishes they may choose to save
themselves by emigrating from the solar
system or by refrigerating the Earth or
by any number of methods inconceivable
to us that do not involve tampering with
the sun end quote and yeah sure and if
they did any of those things it's still
an argument that they are fundamental if
there is this thing in the universe the
human species which an outside Observer
would see is always escaping dying Stars
thus going on to exist for billions
perhaps trillions of years in that
Universe you'd want to understand that
thing in the same way you'd want to
understand nuclear fusion if you want to
say you understand the universe the most
fundamental level of course there is a
problem here that in understanding that
thing humans people to understand it
fully in a sense we can't understand
anything fully but to have a good
understanding of let's say what human
beings are is to understand everything
else because that's what people are okay
you're not going to find an
understanding of people in their genome
you're going to find it in their minds
and what are you going to find in their
minds theories about the rest of the
universe
this is the concept of self-similarity
this remarkable capacity we have of
modeling the rest of physical reality in
us it is this unique feature that we
have yeah sure the cat has a model as it
walks around your house of the house in
some way shape or form but it's not an
explanatory model of the rest of the
universe they're not explaining it you
are you have something okay it might be
inaccurate when it comes to physics it
might not be as good as a professional
physicist when it comes to the Earth it
geologist and so on and so forth that's
fine but you nonetheless have something
of an explanation of the rest of the
universe and good explanations needs not
to be true we've always said that they
can contain misconception and indeed
they could be almost completely
misconceived but they work for you there
a good explanation to you of the rest of
the universe so everyone has this model
of the universe and so in order to
understand people if you're the
so-called the proverbial outside
Observer the metaphorical outside
Observer you need to understand the
entire universe it's a strange thing
let's keep going
on this point about people David says
quote on the other hand they may wish to
control the sun much sooner than would
be required to prevent it from entering
its red giant phase for example to
harness its energy more efficiently or
to Quarry it for raw materials to
construct more living space for
themselves however the point I am making
here does not depend on our being able
to predict that will happen but only on
the proposition that what will happen
will depend on on what knowledge our
descendants will have and on how they
choose to apply it thus one cannot
predict the future of the sun without
taking a position on the future of life
on Earth and in particular on the future
of knowledge end quote and as we know
taking a strong position on the future
of knowledge and therefore off of people
is it a possibility we cannot predict
the growth of knowledge we don't know
what will happen in the future but we
cannot rule out that for example
stars out there in the universe
specifically the sun won't be affected
by life that's taking a strong position
on knowledge I don't know you don't know
it's certainly a possibility we would
hope we would hope that the evolution of
stars begins to be affected by life at
some point we haven't seen any evidence
of this so far but anything not ruled
out by the laws of physics is possible
given the right knowledge as we know now
this next passage here is a breathtaking
example of all the way back in 1997 in
the fabric of reality in this chapter
eight the significance of Life of David
Deutsch reaching the conclusions and
explaining to us the content of the
beginning of infinity a decade and a
half later and even today is still
breathtaking in in the way that it reads
in the year 2022 what does he say about
the significance of life in particular
the significance of people in particular
the significance of knowledge
explanatory knowledge he says it right
here quote the color of the sun 10
billion years hence depend depends on
gravity and radiation pressure on
convection and nucleosynthesis it does
not depend at all on the geology of
Venus the chemistry of Jupiter or the
pattern of craters on the moon
but it does depend on what happens to
intelligent life on the planet Earth
it depends on politics and economics and
the outcomes of Wars it depends on what
people do what decisions they make what
problems they solve what values they
adopt and on how they behave towards
their children end quote that remarkable
passage encapsulates the significance of
people that we cannot predict the
evolution of the sun scientifically
speaking if we ignore the existence of
life on Earth we don't know what people
will do billions of years hence what
choices they will make those depend upon
knowledge created now and in the future
something that we cannot predict the
evolution of we cannot predict the
creation of knowledge by simple
definition of what the word creation
means because it is a genuine Act of
Creation we are creating knowledge
bringing something into existence that
didn't exist before at all and cannot be
predicted by anything we have now by any
process of so-called Bayesian inference
generation because our explanatory
theories of the future will be crafted
around problems yet to be encountered
and those will determine the way in
which society's civilizations and all of
humanity evolves here on planet Earth
and that will determine what we decide
to do about the Sun and eventually the
rest of the cosmos okay let's go back to
the book and David writes one cannot
avoid this conclusion by adopting a
pessimistic theory of the prospects for
our survival such a theory does not
follow from the laws of physics or from
any other fundamental principle that we
know of and can be justified only in
higher level human terms such as
scientific knowledge has outrun moral
knowledge or whatever
so in arguing from such a theory one is
implicitly conceding that theories of
human Affairs are necessary for making
astrophysical predictions and even if
the human race will in the event fail in
its efforts to survive does the
pessimistic Theory apply to every
extraterrestrial intelligence in the
universe if not if some intelligent life
in some Galaxy will ever succeed in
surviving for billions of years then
life is significant in the gross
physical development of the universe
throughout our galaxy and the Multiverse
Stellar Evolution depends on whether and
where intelligent life has evolved and
if so on the outcomes of its Wars and
how it treats its children for example
we can predict roughly what proportions
of stars of different colors more
precisely of different spectral types
there should be in the galaxy to do that
we will have to make some assumptions
about how much intelligent life there is
out there and what it has been doing
namely that it has not been switching
off too many stars at the moment our
Observer questions are consistent with
there being no intelligent life outside
our solar system when our theories of
the structure of the Galaxy are further
refined we shall be able to make more
precise predictions but again only on
the basis of assumptions about the
distribution and behavior of
intelligence in the Galaxy if those
assumptions are inaccurate we shall
predict the wrong distribution of
spectral types just as surely as if we
were to make a mistake about the
composition of interstellar gases or
about the mass of the hydrogen atom and
if we detect certain anomalies in this
distribution of spectral types this
could be evidence of the presence of
extraterrestrial intelligence end quote
this is part of the discussion that the
seti scientists have and the seti
project in general is trying to
constrain using something called the
Drake equation we've talked about the
Drake equation here on topcast before
this is the way in which people try to
constrain how many intelligent
civilizations there will be out there
somewhere or other and among the terms
in the Drake equation is of course the
length of time for which civilizations
exist so you might you might have
intelligent civilizations out there but
they could destroy themselves and this
is what people are often animated about
here on Earth uh whether or not there is
this great filter out there somewhere
that prevents civilizations from
reaching the level of Technology
required for them to travel
intergalactically let's say and if they
don't quite get there and they're
snuffed out well it might mean that the
time for which they're transmitting
radio signals is a very very narrow
window indeed so this is another reason
why we don't tend to detect signals from
outer space because intelligent
civilizations like ours invent Radio use
radio for about 100 200 300 years and
then they get snuffed out by you know
the great nuclear accident or
catastrophic climate change or by
creating the AGI apocalypse or who knows
what there's some filter something
stopping the intelligence from taking
over the entire universe so to speak of
course we could simply be the first
intelligent civil realization in our
universe or not we don't know our
observations are consistent with well
just about every theory that you can
think of right now including the one
that they have actually colonized the
almost the entire galaxy but are hiding
we don't know we have no evidence it's
just a problem of whether or not there
is intelligent life out there or not
David goes on to say quote
the cosmologists John Barrow and Frank
tipler have considered the astrophysical
effects that life would have if it
survived for long after the time at
which the sun would otherwise become a
red giant they have found that life
would eventually make major qualitative
changes to the structure of the Galaxy
and later to the structure of the whole
universe I shall return to these results
in chapter 14. so once again any theory
of the structure of the universe in all
but its earliest stages must take a
position on what life will or will not
be doing by then there is no way of
getting away from it the future history
of the universe depends on the future
history of knowledge astrologers used to
believe that Cosmic events influence
human Affairs science belief for
centuries that neither influences the
other now we see that human Affairs
influence Cosmic events end quote and as
I like to say here on top cast over and
again people are cosmically significant
and by people I do not just mean the
parochial case of human beings I mean
anything that is capable of generating
explanatory knowledge extraterrestrial
intelligence artificial general
intelligence or ourselves all of those
entities people are able to explain the
reality around them and in doing so can
gain some control over the universe and
as time goes on and the explanations
become more and more in line with
reality their accuracy increases then
the power of that Civilization also
increases this in a sense is what the
power of our civilization would be the
repertoire of possible Transformations
that it can make of the universe the
proportion of the universe that it can
transform and that has to do with of
course wealth wealth is a repertoire of
physical Transformations that can be
made and the more of those that you can
do the more powerful your civilization
happens to be let's keep on going David
Wright's quote it is worth reflecting on
where we went astray in underestimating
the physical impact of life it was by
being too parochial that is ironic
because the ancient consensus happened
to avoid our mistake by being even more
parochial in the universe as we see it
life has affected nothing of any
astrophysical significance however we
see only the past and it is only the
past of what is spatially near us that
we see in any detail end quote so that's
very interesting of course so we're only
seeing the nearby region of space and
the nearby region of space we are seeing
seeing it as it was because of the
finite speed of light we are seeing you
know the nearest star as it was four
years ago we are seeing the nearest
galaxy the Andromeda galaxy as it was
2.2 million years ago so these these
relatively close region space that we
observe were seeing them as they were in
the past so we're biased we have a bias
of seeing our own history in the past
and we're biased and seeing spatially
close regions to us as they were in the
past as well so of course we're not
seeing what the future is going to be
like in the future might very well be
radically different to what the Press in
the past is we already know that it is
here on Earth New York City looks
nothing like it did a century ago so we
already know that there has been a
radical transformation here on the
surface of the Earth in certain parts of
the surface of the Earth this is only
going to continue a pace and eventually
the solar system will be transformed and
eventually the Galaxy will be
transformed there's no point looking
around at what has already gone what has
already come to pass and what exists
around us right now because we're
looking into the past so we should
expect things to be more primitive now
whether or not of course distant alien
civilizations got their first that's
another matter but perhaps they didn't
there are good arguments as to why for
example we shouldn't necessarily expect
Evolution to be going on a whole lot
faster out there as compared to here
that's another story let's not get into
it I refer The Listener to the book Rare
Earth by Ward and Brownlee that I have
mentioned before okay so I'm going to
skip through a bunch of this chapter and
I'll pick it up where David begins to
explain a little bit more about
Evolution itself and evolution as it
happens with DNA and he says quote we
know that DNA in living organisms is
naturally subject to random variations
mutations in the sequence of a c g and T
molecules according to the theory of
evolution the adaptations in genes and
therefore the Gene's very existence
depends on such mutations having
occurred because of mutations
populations of any Gene contain a degree
of variation an individuals carrying
genes with higher degrees of adaptation
tend to have more offspring than other
individuals most variations in a gene
make it unable to cause its replication
because the altered sequence no longer
instructs the cell to manufacture
anything useful others merely make
replication less likely that is they
narrow the Gene's Niche but some happen
to embody new instructions that make
replication more likely thus natural
selection occurs with each generation of
variation replica education the degree
of adaptation of the surviving genes
tends to increase now a random mutation
caused for instance by a cosmic ray
strike causes variation not only within
the population of the organism in one
universe but between universes as well a
cosmic ray is a high energy subatomic
particle and like a photon emitted from
a torch it travels in different
directions in different universes so
when a cosmic ray particle strikes a DNA
strand and causes a mutation some of its
counterparts in other universes are
missing their copies of the DNA strand
altogether While others are striking it
at different positions and hence causing
different mutations thus a single cosmic
ray strike on a single DNA molecule will
in general cause a large range of
different mutations to appear in
different universes when considering
what a particular object may look like
in other universes we must not look so
far afield in the Multiverse that it is
impossible to identify a counterpart in
the other Universe of that object take a
DNA segment for instance in some
universes there are no DNA molecules at
all some universes containing DNA are so
dissimilar to ours that there is no way
of identifying which DNA segment in the
other Universe corresponds to the one we
are considering in this universe it is
meaningless to ask what our particular
DNA segment looks like in such a
universe so we must consider only
universes that are sufficiently similar
to ours for this ambiguity not to arise
for instance we could consider only
those universes in which bears exist and
in which a sample of DNA from a bear has
been placed in analyzing machine which
has been programmed to print out 10
letters representing the structure at a
specified position relative to certain
landmarks on a specified DNA strand the
following discussion would be unaffected
if we were to choose any other
reasonable Criterion for identifying
corresponding segments of DNA in nearby
universes by any such Criterion the
Bear's Gene segment must have the same
sequence in almost all all nearby
universes as it does in ours this is
because it is presumably highly adapted
which means that most variants of it
would not succeed in getting themselves
copied in most variants of their
environment and so could not appear at
that location in the DNA of a living
bear in contrast when the non-knowledge
bearing DNA segment undergoes almost any
mutation the mutated version is still
capable of being copied over generations
of replication many mutations will have
occurred and most of them will have had
no effect on replication therefore the
junk DNA segment unlike its counterpart
in the gene will be thoroughly
heterogeneous in different universes it
may well be that every possible
variation of its sequence is equally
represented in the Multiverse that is
what we should mean by its sequence
being strictly random so the Multiverse
perspective reveals additional physical
structure in the Bear's DNA in this
universe it contains two segments with
the sequence t c g t c g t t t c one of
them is part of a gene while the other
is not part of any Gene in most other
nearby universes the first of the two
segments has the same sequence
tcgtc g t t c as it does in our universe
but the second segment varies greatly
between nearby universes so from the
Multiverse perspective the two segments
are not even remotely alike end quote
what this is saying is that in the DNA
strand that you have inside of your body
or inside of a bear's body let's say you
have the thing called The genome the set
of all the genes and then you have this
other stuff the junk DNA now it's the
genes the code for stuff it contains the
knowledge bearing information the junk
DNA does not not everything on the DNA
contains useful information or does it
after all the junk DNA is actually quite
useful information for forensic
scientists apparently forensic
scientists use the junk DNA to identify
criminals at a crime scene when you
leave blood behind be because your junk
DNA is so unique to you compared to
everyone else whereas the the actual
coding information on the genome your
genes are similar to other people so
it's more telling of you your junk DNA
is more unique to you than the rest of
your DNA which is the genome but it
doesn't constitute evolutionary
knowledge of course whatever the case
David is getting on to the fact that
this living material this DNA is the
stuff that contains knowledge as he says
quote again we were being too parochial
and we were led to the false conclusion
that knowledge bearing entities can be
physically identical to non-knowledge
bearing ones and this in turn casts
doubt on the fundamental status of
knowledge but now we have come almost
full circle we can see that the ancient
idea that living matter has special
physical properties was almost true it
is not living matter but knowledge
bearing matter that is physically
special within one Universe it looks
irregular across universes it has a
regular structure like a crystal in the
Multiverse so knowledge is a fundamental
physical quantity after all and the
phenomenon of life is only slightly less
so end quote so if a bear exists here in
this universe there are a lot of other
universes adjacent to ours which also
contain Bears why because the set of
genes that creates a bear he happens to
have useful information that's a useful
structure for evolution to have built in
order for genes to get replicated
knowledge bearing entities contain
information that is useful it tends to
get itself copied and so therefore it is
going to be replicated not only again
and again in any given particular
universe but across the Multiverse and
so it is this structure which tends to
grow across the Multiverse information
flow is what is happening in the
Multiverse because of the creation of
knowledge both of the evolutionary kind
and the explanatory kind and it tends to
grow like this Crystal in the Multiverse
as David says there but this is
knowledge not truth I say again
knowledge not truth knowledge is the
thing that tends to get itself copied
and if you were able to have a God's eye
view of the Multiverse you would see
these structures growing governed by the
growth of knowledge but they might very
well be you know huge religions or
political movements which might have
little to do with truth we don't know
but they could still be really really
big on the other hand you would also
have science which presumably would have
something to do with the truth but by
looking you wouldn't be able to tell you
would just know that they are both
knowledge useful information now in
either case could they be completely
disconnected from the truth no not
completely disconnected from the truth
but the size of such a crystal in the
Multiverse wouldn't tell you about the
closeness to truth of that particular
thing let's get going David says quote
imagine looking through an electron
microscope at a DNA molecule from a bear
cell and trying to distinguish the genes
from the non-gene sequences and to
estimate the degree of adaptation of
each gene in any one Universe this task
is impossible the property of being a
gene that is of being highly adapted is
insofario sets can be detected within
one Universe overwhelmingly complicated
it is an emergent property you would
have to make many copies of the DNA with
variations use genetic engineering to
create many bare embryos for each
variant of the DNA allow the Bears to
grow up and live in a variety of
environments representative of the best
Niche and see which Bears succeed in
having Offspring but with a magic
microscope that could see into other
universes which I stress is not possible
we are using Theory to imagine or render
what we know must be there the task
would be easy the genes would stand out
from the non-genes just as cultivated
Fields stand out from a jungle in an
aerial photograph or like crystals that
are precipitated from solution they are
regular across many nearby universes
while all the non-jain junk DNA segments
are irregular as for the degree of
adaptation of a gene this is almost as
easy to estimate the better adapted
genes will have the same structure over
a wider range of universes they will
have bigger crystals now go to an alien
planet and try to find the local life
forms if any again this is a notoriously
difficult task you would have to perform
complex and subtle experiments whose
infinite pitfalls have been the subject
of many a science fiction story but if
only you could observe through a
Multiverse telescope life and its
consequences would be obvious at a
glance you need only look for complex
structures that seem irregular in any
one universe but are identical across
many nearby universes if you see any you
will have found some physically embodied
knowledge where there is knowledge there
must have been life at least in the past
end quote so that's great that again
just underlines the point I was making
about the fact that the Multiverse
viewed from a God's eye perspective will
have the larger structures in it
governed by the growth of knowledge in
some way whether that knowledge is
evolutionary knowledge or more likely
explanatory knowledge in the far distant
future if you could look at the whole
block Multiverse past and future it is
knowledge growth that is going to govern
the bigger structures across the
Multiverse across the individual
universes and the universes where
knowledge is growing because of course
some universes life might not have
Arisen in which case knowledge cannot
Arise at all but in the universe is
where knowledge tends to arise the
universe has become more similar over
time why because they tend to converge
on the useful information they tend to
converge on something to do with reality
over time but again all of this is
merely thinking in the abstract we can't
get outside of the universe this is just
a thought experiment to illuminate the
structure of the Multiverse something
that otherwise is hidden from US unless
you're doing physics and you're looking
at the equations and you're trying to
understand what this equations and the
formalism are telling you about the
nature of reality skipping a little more
and just reaching the conclusion of this
chapter now and David says quote what
will catch our magically enhanced eye in
a single Universe the most striking
structures are galaxies and clusters of
galaxies but those objects have no
discernible structure across the
Multiverse where there is a Galaxy in
one Universe a myriad of galaxies with
quite different geographies are stacked
in the Multiverse and so it is
everywhere in the Multiverse nearby
universes are alike only in certain
gross features as required by the laws
of physics which apply to them all thus
most stars are quite accurately
spherical everywhere in the Multiverse
and most galaxies are spiral or
elliptical but nothing extends far into
other universes without its detailed
structure changing unrecognizably except
that is in those few places where there
is embodied knowledge in such places
objects extend recognizably across large
numbers of universes perhaps the Earth
is the only such place in our universe
at present in any case such places stand
out in the sense I have described as the
location of the processes life and
thought that have generated the largest
distinctive structures in the Multiverse
end quote and that's a brilliant way for
David to have ended this particular
chapter and what people might have
missed the import of the first time in
Reading because he's saying there that
if you were able to look at the
Multiverse the largest most distinctive
structures in them are those determined
by life and thought that's a profound
claim that is a cosmically important
claim that is a claim that dwarfs the
kind of claims that are made in religion
where although people are significant
they're not the things that determine
the entire fate of the cosmos or are
they well normally it's the gods or God
that determines the fate of the entire
Cosmos but here it's the people it's
thought and life that is determining the
overall structure of the largest
structure that exists in physical
reality the Multiverse itself the
largest structure in those is determined
by life and thoughts ultimately by
people well then I can't top that for
now so until next time bye-bye